In compiling a treatise on the subject of lead burning too much stress
cannot be laid upon the fact that the greatest care must be taken to
observe the smallest details and to follow carefully every suggestion in
regard to safety. I am aware of the responsibility resting upon me in
placing this article into hundreds of hands, comparatively ignorant of
the danger involved in handling so much hydrogen, without thoroughly
instructing them in detail as to its use. I may be excused, therefore,
if, for that reason, some of the explanations are so simple as to seem
ridiculous; but my aim is to present to the trade a treatise that can be
relied upon to be free from theory that has not been thoroughly tried
and tested, so that the beginner can be sure that, if he follows
directions as printed, nothing but satisfaction to him can result.


                   Study the Chapter on Hydrogen Gas.

I cannot too strongly recommend that the beginner study the chapter on
hydrogen gas until the main points are memorized and clearly understood.
The experiments should be performed and the result carefully noted for
future reference before attempting to use the generator. It is time well
spent to master the technical parts thoroughly before attempting the
mechanical part. Then when a man takes up the mechanical he will do so
with an intelligent understanding of what he is doing, and any little
trouble which may then arise can be quickly overcome.

Another thing to be observed is to avoid nervousness. A nervous person
cannot do this work with any degree of satisfaction, as it requires a
cool head and a steady hand and a vast amount of patience to burn the
upright and inverted seams.


                        Lead Burning Explained.

Lead burning is the process of fusing two pieces of lead together
without the use of solder. The process consists in melting the edges
together, a drop at a time, and when done with hydrogen gas and the blow
pipe is called the “autogenous process.” Lead can be fused with gasoline
or illuminating gas by the use of the compound blow pipe; but, as
ordinary gases give an oxidizing flame and require a flux, it is not
considered a practical method.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 1.—Lead Burning Apparatus._
]

Lead is used extensively in lining tanks made to contain pickle dips,
hot cyanide solution, storage batteries, acid tanks for manufacturing
jewelry and water closet tanks, as water in many cases contains large
quantities of lime and other deposits which rapidly destroy the solder
used on copper linings. Tanks used for the above purposes must be lined
with lead and the seams burned, as acids attack the tin in solders and
destroy them. The demand for the work is rapidly increasing where it is
introduced. I have demonstrated to many manufacturers that this is the
cheapest method known, as it gives a permanent solution of the problem
how to keep a chemical tank tight.


                   Method of Making Lead Lined Tanks.

The most common method resorted to in many large factories is to make
the tanks out of very heavy cypress lumber, free from any knots or
blemishes. The joints are carefully dovetailed and fitted together, and
long bolts are used to draw the joints and keep them from leaking.
Usually it takes from three to four days to complete one small tank,
only to have it leak in a few months; whereas the same tank can be built
in a few hours of any cheap lumber, and then, when it is lined with lead
of a proper thickness and the seams burned it will usually last for an
indefinite period, thereby saving floors and, many times, costly plating
solutions.

The most common argument put forth by manufacturers is that the bottoms
of lead lined tanks are soon cut out, owing to dropping sharp pieces of
metal into them. This difficulty can be best overcome by placing a
slatted bottom of wood in the tank, holding the same in place with
strips of sheet lead, one end of which has been previously burned to the
bottom of the tank. These strips are to be brought up through the slats
and then bent over the top of them. This will keep the wood from
floating, and is the only practical way to do it, as the false bottoms
soon decay, and can be easily removed and replaced by simply bending
back the strips of lead.


                            General Remarks.

Soft solder, as referred to here, means solder that melts at a
temperature of 300 degrees or less, and is so called because of the low
heat required to fuse the solder. It is used almost exclusively on the
quick melting metals and compositions, such as block tin pipes and
Britannia metal. It is also used by pattern makers in soldering white
metal, as it requires but very little heat to sweat it through heavy
articles. It should not be used to join any pipes which convey hot water
or other hot liquids, as it is readily acted upon and destroyed. (The
composition of these solders is explained in a special chapter.)

The chapters on blow pipe work, also on bar work, will alone turn many
dollars into the pockets of the plumbers who have courage and ambition
to acquire this line of work. Many times small leaks occur in difficult
places that can be readily repaired by the use of the blow pipe and a
common candle.

The lining of bars with Britannia metal is coming more and more into
general practice, and it usually requires a specialist in this line to
do the work. The soldering of this metal with a blow pipe and an alcohol
torch is an easy matter, and is described in a special chapter.

There is no reason why this work should not be done by a plumber,
particularly in small cities and towns, and to aid such as have not had
the opportunity to familiarize themselves with such work I append such
diagrams as may seem useful and necessary.




                              CHAPTER II.
                             THE APPARATUS.


The apparatus used for lead burning is illustrated in Fig. 1. It
consists of a gas generator, A; an air holder, B, and pump, C; mixing
fork, _e_, and necessary cocks, _f_ and _g_; combined scrubbing cup and
fire trap, _h_; blow pipe and tips, _i_.

The generator consists of an acid chamber, _j_, and a gas chamber, _k_.
These are connected with an acid supply pipe, _l_, which conducts the
acid from the acid chamber to the gas chamber, and also serves as a
balance pipe.

This feature makes the generator automatic in its action, for as soon as
the gas in the gas chamber gets up sufficient pressure, the acid in the
gas chamber _k_ is driven slowly back through the acid supply pipe _l_
and up into the acid chamber _j_, where it is held until gas is used.
When the acid descends and submerges the zinc more gas is generated,
replacing that which has been used. This form of generator will never
blow acid like the floating generator.

The requirements of a hydrogen generator for lead burning are that it
should be safe, economical and automatic in its action. It must be so
constructed that it will generate gas enough to keep the supply
constant, and deliver it at sufficient pressure to keep the flame
steady. It must also be provided with a combination fire trap and
scrubbing cup. This will prevent the explosion of the generator by
firing the gas in the hose. This trap must be partly filled with a
solution of blue vitriol to act as a precipitation cup. (This is treated
under the head of “Scrubbing Cup.”)

The chief danger with an apparatus of this sort is its liability to
accident by the careless use of the gas, and, as a mixture of hydrogen
and air is very explosive, great care must be taken to exhaust all the
air in the generator and tubes before attempting to light the gas at the
blow pipe. The only way to make sure that the air is exhausted is to
test the gas, as described under the head of “The Flame and Its
Management.”


                            A Few Cautions.

It is a very sensible idea to keep spectators away from the generator,
as they are very apt to strike matches or tread on the tubes, in spite
of warnings to be cautious, for if there should be a leak, even so
slight as to be hardly detected, it would cause a violent explosion, and
as hydrogen is both odorless and colorless, this could easily happen
without being noticed. This is probably the origin of the apparent
secrecy with which a lead burner usually surrounds himself.

If an explosion should occur in the tubes and they should catch fire,
the operator must have presence of mind enough to reach the gas cock on
the generator and close it. If gas explodes in the generator, all that
can be done is to dodge the flying pieces and make a new generator. If
such an incident should occur and vitriol should spatter on the person
doing the work, or his assistant, a solution of bicarbonate of soda or
common washing soda should be at once applied to the wounds. If that
cannot be procured, grease or oil of some kind should be used without
delay, rubbing it on the spots where the acid burns, and this will
neutralize the acid and so prevent it doing further damage. There should
be no trouble of this sort in the hands of a careful workman. The
watchword should be, “Test the gas before using.” If this is done,
explosions will never occur.




                              CHAPTER III.
                             HYDROGEN GAS.


This element was discovered by Cavendish in 1766, and was called by him
inflammable air. The name hydrogen is derived from two Greek words, one
signifying “water” and the other “to generate,” on account of its
forming water when burnt. It occurs in its free state in the bases of
volcanoes, and by the aid of the spectroscope has been detected in the
sun and stars. It chiefly exists in combination with oxygen as water,
and is an important constituent of all vegetable and animal substances.

Hydrogen is obtained by the decomposition of water in various ways. On a
large scale, nearly pure hydrogen may be prepared by passing steam over
charcoal, or coke, heated to a dull redness. If the temperature be kept
sufficiently low hydrogen and carbon dioxide will be the sole products,
and the latter may be removed by causing it to traverse a vessel filled
with slaked lime, but if the temperature be allowed to rise too high, or
an excess of air be admitted, carbon monoxide is also produced, and
cannot be removed from the mixture.

Pure hydrogen is a colorless, odorless, transparent and tasteless gas,
and has never been liquefied. It is very slightly soluble in water. It
is the lightest of all known bodies and is not poisonous, although it
cannot support life, and if mixed with a certain proportion of oxygen it
can be breathed for a considerable length of time without inconvenience.
It is highly inflammable, and burns in the air with an almost colorless,
nonluminous flame, forming water. A burning taper is extinguished when
plunged into hydrogen, and all bodies which burn in the air are
incapable of burning in hydrogen.

Hydrogen does not spontaneously enter into reaction with any of the
elements, although it has a powerful affinity for several of them. Thus,
when hydrogen and oxygen are mixed nothing occurs, but if a lighted
splint is introduced a violent explosion ensues, water being produced.
Similarly chlorine and hydrogen are without action upon each other in
the dark, but if the mixture is exposed to a bright light, or if heated
by the passage of an electric spark, the gases are at once combined with
explosive violence, forming hydrochloric acid.

Hydrogen is usually prepared by the action of zinc or iron on a solution
of hydrochloric or sulphuric acid. All metals which decompose water when
heated readily furnish hydrogen, on treatment with hydrochloric or
sulphuric acid. Many other metals enter more or less readily (although
none so readily) into reaction with these acids. Also, many other acids
than sulphuric or hydrochloric acids may be used, but none acts so
quickly. In all cases the action consists of the displacement of the
hydrogen of the acid by the metal employed, and if the acid is not one
which can enter into reaction with the displaced hydrogen, the latter is
also evolved as gas.

If pure gas is required it is necessary to employ pure zinc or iron, as
the impurities in the ordinary metal communicate an extremely
disagreeable odor to the gas.

The pure gas is not absolutely essential for lead burning, and owing to
their being much cheaper, and also on account of their increased
quickness of action, the commercial qualities of sulphuric acid and zinc
are employed in the generator described.

The commercial zinc is known as spelter and is sold in pigs or blocks,
which are easily broken into fragments, like stove coal, with a heavy
hammer. The commercial sulphuric acid is known as oil of vitriol and is
sold by the pound. The acid cannot be employed in its pure state, but
must be reduced with water in the proportion of one part of acid to
seven parts of warm water. They must be mixed by adding the acid slowly
to the water; never the water to the acid. The combination of acid and
water enters at once into reaction and always generates heat, and the
result of adding water to acid would be small explosions. There would be
danger of the acid flying on one's clothes or into the eyes. The mixture
should never be stronger than six parts of water to one of acid.

The beginner will observe from the above that the generator cannot be
crowded by making the acid solution strong. Hydrogen is a peculiar gas
and also a dangerous one for one ignorant of its peculiarities to
experiment with, and in order to thoroughly understand it the following
experiments should be demonstrated, which can be done with little
expense. The beginner should note the result of each experiment as
demonstrated, and carefully commit the same to memory for future
reference.


                             Experiment 1.

_Test for Hydrogen._—Fill a small jar or wide mouthed bottle with
hydrogen. This is done by first filling the bottle with water, inserting
the end of the tube from the hydrogen generator, having first exhausted
the air in the tube, then quickly inverting the bottle and placing the
neck, Fig. 2, in a pan of water (A); the water will stay in the bottle.
Now turn on the hydrogen. The gas, being lighter than water, will rise
to the top of the bottle (B), drive out the water, and replace it with
pure hydrogen, which should be free from air. Remove the bottle from the
pan of water, keeping it inverted. Thrust a lighted splint into the
bottle. The gas will light and burn at the mouth of the bottle. If the
splint is thrust far into the bottle it will go out. Drops of water
collect in the bottle. Burning is a union with oxygen; therefore, the
burning of the hydrogen shows that it has an affinity for oxygen. The
splint goes out because the hydrogen does not support combustion. _If no
air is allowed to get into it the gas cannot burn or explode._

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 2.—Experiment No. 1._
]


                             Experiment 2.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 3.—Experiment No. 2._
]

_Proving That Hydrogen is Lighter Than Air._—Bring an inverted bottle of
hydrogen close to an empty bottle, also inverted, Fig. 2. Gradually tip
the bottle containing hydrogen (A) until it is brought to an upright
position beneath the empty bottle. Test the bottles for hydrogen. The
hydrogen will be found in the bottle (B) that was at first empty,
proving that _hydrogen is lighter than air_, as it has risen in the
empty bottle, displacing the air that was in it. If the bottle of
hydrogen is left in an upright position without a cover for a few
moments the gas will entirely disappear.


                             Experiment 3.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 4.—Experiment No. 3._
]

_The Effect of Mixing Hydrogen and Air._—Half fill a bottle with water
and invert it in a pan of water, Fig. 3, leaving the upper half filled
with air. Displace the air in the bottle with hydrogen, then thrust a
lighted splint into the bottle, and the gas will light with an
explosion. When the bottle was half filled with water the other half was
air. The hydrogen took the place of the water, so that the bottle
contained equal quantities of hydrogen and air. When the hydrogen was
lighted it combined with the oxygen in the air. The union of the two
gases caused the explosion, proving that the combined gases are very
explosive.


                             Experiment 4.

_To Make Hydrogen From Water._—Drop a piece of potassium into a little
water and cover it. The potassium floats on the water and soon burns.
Potassium acts vigorously on cold water, setting free hydrogen, and
unites with parts of it to form “caustic potash.”




                              CHAPTER IV.
                   THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE GENERATOR.


The construction of the generator is the first step in the mechanical
part of the business, and to simplify this a complete set of reference
drawings has been constructed and is herewith given. The assembling of
the parts should be clear, with the assistance of the perspective
drawing of the completed apparatus, and any mechanic of ordinary ability
should be able to construct this generator without any trouble. The
following bill of material should first be purchased:

  One ⅞-inch whitewood board 10 inches wide and 8 feet 6 inches long.

  One ½-inch whitewood board 12 inches wide and 4 feet 6 inches long.

  One piece of 6-pound sheet lead 3 feet wide and 6 feet 6 inches
  long.

  Three ⅛-inch female hose end gas cocks.

  One piece of ⅛-inch brass tubing 2 feet long.

  One foot of ¼-inch lead pipe.

  One 4-inch charging screw.

  One 1¼-inch cleaning screw.


                Making the Charging and Cleaning Screws.

These goods can be readily purchased from dealers, with the exception of
the charging and cleaning screws. They can be made in any brass foundry.
The only difference between the charging and cleaning screws is the
size. The charging screw, Fig. 5, should be at least 4 inches in
diameter, or large enough to pass the hand through, while the cleaning
screw should be 1¼ inches in diameter, or large enough to pass over a
1-inch pipe. A piece of sheet lead is fitted into the cover, as shown at
_a_, to protect the metal from the acid. Soft putty is used for a
packing, as shown in Fig. 5.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 5.—The Charging Screw._
]

The best, although a more expensive, charging screw is shown in Fig. 6.
As will be seen from the cut, it consists of a base, _k_; cover, _d_;
clamp, _e_, and screw, _f_. The base is simply a plain iron or brass
ring, 4 inches in diameter, ⅛ inch thick and 1 inch high. The bottom is
to be faced smooth, while the top is recessed 3-16 inch deep to receive
the sheet lead and packing of putty, as at _a_. Two nubs, _b_ and _b_,
are cast on opposite sides, as shown, to act as grips for the clamp _c_.
These nubs are ¾ inch long and project out from the body of the base ¼
inch, and are made sufficiently strong to stand the strain of the screw.
The cover _d_ is made of the same material as the base, the center being
raised, as shown, to give it strength. Cast directly in the center and
on the top is the nub _e_, ⅝ inch high and ⅝ inch in diameter. This is
drilled to receive the ⅜-inch screw _f_. A groove 1-16 inch wide and
1-16 inch deep is cut all around the bottom of the screw, as shown at
_i_. A hole is then drilled through the side of the nub _e_, and in line
with the slot _i_. A pin can then be driven through the hole and will
pass through the slot _i_, making a swivel joint that will connect the
cover and screw together. The screw _f_ is made of ⅜-inch round iron
sufficiently long to give an action of about 1 inch. The top at _n_ is
filed square to receive a wheel such as is used on a common gate valve.
A long thread should then be cut on this screw. The clamp _c_ is made a
half circle in shape, so as to clear the cover with ease. It should be ¾
inch wide, flat on the under side, while the top side should have a rib
cast on it to prevent springing. The top at _g_ should be reinforced
with metal and made heavy enough to stand drilling and tapping to
receive the screw _f_. A wood pattern can be made for these parts, and
they can then be molded in any brass or iron foundry. In making the
patterns they should be cut down as much as possible, so as to make the
finished article as light as is consistent with the strength required.
The same directions will answer for the cleaning screw. The hole to
receive the sheet lead over the cleaning screw should not be over 1½
inches in diameter, and the rest of the screw should be made in
proportion to this hole. The advantage of this screw over others is that
it does not wrench the sheet lead in making it up, and, owing to its
construction, it is always sure to make a tight joint without straining
the generator.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 6.—The Best Charging Screw._
]


                          Building the Frame.

The frame can be made of galvanized iron, but wood is much superior, as
it retains the heat generated in the gas chamber much better. To make
the frame take the ⅞-inch board and cut off two pieces, 10 inches
square, A and B in Fig. 8; 5 inches from one side and 2 inches from the
back of one of these pieces bore a 1½-inch hole, C, and countersink it.
This is for the acid supply pipe to pass through. These pieces are
intended for shelves upon which to rest the acid and gas chambers. Cut
the remaining board into two pieces 38 inches long. Lay these two boards
together. Five inches from the side and 3 inches from the bottom bore a
1½-inch hole, _d_. Then saw out a V-shaped piece, Fig. 7. This will form
the legs of the generator.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 7.—Making the Acid Chamber._
]

Take a square, and 12 inches from the top of these boards draw the lines
_e_ and _e_. Twenty-two inches below these lines draw the lines _f_ and
_f_. These lines represent the tops of the shelves. The shelves should
be nailed or screwed into place. The shelf B should be placed on the
top, keeping the hole C to the back. Take the ½-inch board and cut two
pieces to measure 12 × 13 inches and two pieces 11 × 12 inches. These
form the sides of the acid and gas chambers. The two 12 × 13 inch boards
form the sides of the acid chamber and the 11 × 12 inch boards the sides
of the gas chamber.

Directly in the center and 1¾ inches from the bottom of one of the 11 ×
12 inch boards bore a 1½-inch hole. The remaining piece should be sawed
out, leaving a hole at _g_. This is so that the board can be removed in
case of a leak without disturbing the cleaning screw. These pieces
should be fitted to their places with round head screws, and if properly
done will form an acid chamber which will measure 10 × 10 × 12 inches,
and the gas chamber will measure 10 × 10 × 10 inches. The acid chamber
must be larger than the gas chamber, to allow the full charge of acid to
be used without overflowing.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 8.—Making the Shelves and the Perforated Bottom._
]

Now fit the sheet lead. Six-pound is plenty heavy for this generator and
will last a lifetime. Cut it as shown in Fig. 8, A and B. Form the lead
so that the seams when finished will come on the outside, as in case of
a leak in a seam it can then be easily repaired by removing one of the
boards. The projecting edges of lead should be dressed over the edges of
the top to protect the wood from the acid, but do not fasten them, as
the tanks will have to be removed and the seams burned.

Now cut the piece of lead C to form the top of the gas chamber. None is
needed for the acid chamber, as it must be left open so that no
resistance will be offered to the action of the gas on the acid. Five
inches from the side and 2 inches from the back of this piece cut a
hole, _d_, Fig. 8, 1¼ inches in diameter, and dress it up with the
bending iron to 1½ inches in diameter, taking care to preserve the
thickness of the metal. This is for the acid supply pipe to pass
through.

Three inches from the side and 3 inches from the front cut a ⅛-inch
hole, _e_. This is the gas outlet. Three and one-half inches from the
opposite side and 4 inches from the front cut the hole _f_, 2¾ inches in
diameter. Dress this up and over the flange of the charging screw _a_,
Fig. 6. This may seem a difficult thing to do, but lead must be worked
slowly. Heating the lead while dressing it will help wonderfully. If it
is not possible to make a good job in this manner, then cut the hole 4
inches in diameter and burn in a collar sufficiently big to dress over
and cover the flange of the screw. This is to prevent acid from coming
into contact with the screw and destroying it. Treat the cleaning screw
in the same manner. The location of this screw is in the center and as
close as possible to the bottom of the gas chamber, as shown in Fig. 8
at _j_.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 8½.—Showing the Perforated Spelter Shelf in Place in the
    Generator._
]

It is necessary to have a false perforated bottom in the gas chamber to
rest the zinc upon and also to keep it above the solution. To make and
support this bottom take a piece of sheet lead 14 inches square, as
shown in Fig. 8, and form it in the shape of a pan, which will drop
easily into the gas chamber _k_, Fig. 8½. A piece of 1½ or 2 inch lead
pipe, 2 inches long, _n_, should be burned on the center of the false
bottom, to prevent the center from sagging with the weight of zinc. Then
punch the bottom O, Fig. 8, full of ¼-inch holes. A 1½-inch hole, _y_,
should also be cut in line with the holes for the acid supply pipe.

Remove the tanks and burn the seams. Place the tanks back in place. Then
take a piece of the ⅛-inch brass pipe, 1½ inches long. Cut a thread on
one end, tin the other end, and burn it to the top of the gas chamber at
_e_; also the collar for the charging screw. Then place the perforated
bottom in the gas chamber, taking care to keep the holes for the acid
supply pipe in line. Do not make any mistake in putting in this bottom.
Its use is to act as a shelf to hold the zinc, and if put in properly it
will hold the zinc about 2 inches above the real bottom. The top of the
gas chamber _c_ should then be burned in. Now by measuring find the
exact length of the acid supply pipe, Fig. 7, _i_. This pipe should
extend from the bottom of the acid chamber _o_ to the bottom of the gas
chamber _p_, as shown in Fig. 7. From one end of this pipe several
V-shaped pieces should be cut, _p_, about 1 inch deep.

This is one of the most particular parts of the apparatus, as this is
where the automatic action comes in, and great care must be taken in
cutting these holes not to have any of them come closer to the
perforated bottom than 1 inch. If this were not observed the acid would
be constantly in contact with the zinc, and would rapidly get up
pressure of gas sufficient to blow acid out of the upper tank, and the
extra gas would escape through the acid supply pipe in blows. In fact,
it would make the generator useless. This is the trouble with the French
apparatus. The acid, having no place to expand in, is constantly coming
into contact with the zinc, and unless the gas is being used as fast as
generated it will blow acid out of the acid holder, making a bad mess,
besides being very wasteful.

Now flange the other end of this pipe to fit the countersunk bottom of
the acid chamber. Place the pipe in position and burn it to the bottom
of the acid chamber and to the top of the gas chamber _n_, Fig. 7. One
of the ⅛-inch gas cocks should be screwed on the brass nipple on top of
the gas chamber. This will complete the gas generator. It will make a
better job if the back of the generator be boarded tight and a door made
to fit the space between the bottom of the acid chamber and the top of
the gas chamber in front. It is very convenient to have it fixed in this
manner, as in shipping it from one point to another the tubes and other
incidentals can be placed in the space so made and shipped with safety.
There is no objection to the acid and gas chambers being made in the
shape of cylinders, instead of square, if so desired, but if made
circular they should be made to fit the frame tightly to prevent jarring
and eventually breaking the seams.




                               CHAPTER V.
                 MAKING THE GAS TO BURN THE GENERATOR.


In towns supplied with illuminating gas it is a comparatively simple
operation to burn the lead lining for the generator, but for the
convenience of those who cannot obtain gas it is necessary to give some
method by which the generator can be burned. The method described will
answer for illuminating gas as well as for gasoline.

To generate gas from gasoline is a simple operation. To do this, take a
common 1-gallon oil can, remove the top of can screw and punch a ¼-inch
hole in the center of it. Then make a tube of tin that will pass through
this hole, sufficiently long to extend half way to the bottom and
project 2 inches outside of can screw, and solder this tube in place.
This projecting tube is for the purpose of connecting to the air holder.
Remove the spout of the can and replace it with one to which the hose
can be connected. Now fill the can two-thirds full of gasoline, but not
full enough to cover the gas outlet, else it would be likely to force
gasoline out instead of gas.

After this is done, screw the can screw in place, the long end of the
tube extending into the gasoline, as shown in _j_, Fig. 9. A hose
connection is now to be made with an air holder. As it is necessary to
have an air holder both for this process and the hydrogen gas process,
methods will be described for making air holders which can be used for
either.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 9.—Gas Apparatus for Burning the Generator._
]


                              Air Holders.

Different lead burners have different views on this subject. Some prefer
the bellows, with a contained air holder; some the air holder built like
a gasometer, while others use an air holder similar to the generator in
construction. These all have their advantages. For my part, I own and
use all three.

The advantage of the bellows is that it can be easily transported and
does the work perfectly, but it requires constant pumping, which soon
tires the helper, and for that reason could not be used on jobs
requiring more than four or five hours' labor.

The gasometer style of air holder is the easiest to use, if one does not
employ a helper and has a large amount of work to do. The pressure can
be regulated to suit the work by placing one or more weights upon it
until the desired pressure is obtained. It does not require pumping up
more than three or four times a day, which is its principal virtue. It
is a perfect shop apparatus. Its disadvantage is that it requires a
large quantity of water to fill it, which is not always available, and
when full it is so heavy that it requires a truck to move it around.

By far the best air holder is the one shown as part of the apparatus in
Fig. 9, and illustrated separately in Fig. 10. This only requires a few
pails of water to fill it, and the exact pressure of the gas can be had
by building it the same hight as the hydrogen gas generator. It does not
require constant pumping, and I recommend this air holder for general
use, as possessing more advantages, with less trouble, than any other
air holder in use. However, all three will be described, and the
beginner can make the one most suited to the material available.


                           Air Holder No. 1.

The beginner will notice in Fig. 10 that this air holder is so
constructed that it gets its air pressure direct from the head of water,
and also that this pressure can be varied by making the connecting piece
of pipe longer or shorter, as may be desired. Of course, the pressure
will vary slightly as the water descends into the air chamber, but not
enough to make it objectionable, as it will be the helper's duty to
watch the water line and renew pumping as often as the water falls below
a certain point.

To make this holder, a tank, _a_, Fig. 10, 12 inches high and 18 inches
in diameter, should be constructed of galvanized sheet iron. On this
tank double seam a flat bottom. The top must be raised slightly, as
shown, to give it strength. This can be done with the raising hammer, or
it can be done by making the circle for the top ¾ inch larger than the
bottom, then making a cut to the center. It can then be drawn together
and riveted in any desired pitch. A hole must be punched in the center
of this top large enough to receive a 1-inch galvanized pipe, _b_. Six
inches apart and 2 inches from the edge punch two holes, _c_ and _d_,
large enough to receive pieces of ⅜-inch galvanized pipe. This top
should then be fitted and placed on the body of the tank.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 10.—Air Holder No. 1._
]

Take a piece of 1-inch galvanized pipe, _e_, sufficiently long to touch
the bottom and projecting 1 inch out of the top of the tank, cut a
thread on the projecting end and drill the other end full of ¼-inch
holes, _f_, to the hight of 1 inch, to allow the water to flow freely.
This pipe rests on the bottom of the lower tank and carries the weight
of the upper tank. Solder this pipe in place. Then take two ⅜-inch
nipples, 1 inch long, and solder them into their places, and on these
nipples screw two ⅜-inch hose end gas cocks, _c_ and _d_. One of these
cocks is for the purpose of connecting to the air pump, and the other to
the mixing cock. As close as possible to the bottom of the tank solder
in a ½-inch coupling, _g_. Into this coupling screw a plug. This is for
the purpose of draining the tank when out of use.

Now make another tank, _h_, 19 inches in diameter and 11 inches deep,
the top to be left open and wired with a heavy wire. Double seam a flat
bottom on this tank. Directly in the center of this bottom punch a hole
large enough to receive a 1-inch coupling. Then cut a 1-inch coupling in
half and solder it into this hole, putting the thread side down and
leaving it as near flush with the outside of the tank as possible, so
that if it is desired to move the air holder to and from a job it can be
taken apart and the lower tank nested in the upper tank, making a
compact bundle and reducing the danger of damage by careless handling.

To connect these tanks, all that is required is a piece of 1-inch iron
pipe, _h_, 12 inches long, with a coupling on one end. To operate this
air holder, close the two air cocks on the lower, or air, tank; then
fill the upper tank nearly full of water, taking care not to put too
much in it, or it will overflow the lower tank and get into the tubes,
and if this happens the tubes will have to be removed and hung up to
dry, or drops of water will be blown into the blow pipe and extinguish
the flame. It is then ready for use. The air in the air chamber is
compressed by the weight of the water in the upper tank, and if the
water line is at the same hight as the acid line in the hydrogen gas
generator the pressure of air must be the same as the pressure of gas.
As air is used the water descends through the pipe and will gradually
fill the lower chamber. It can then be forced back into the water
chamber by attaching the air pump to the cock _h_ in Fig. 9, or _d_ in
Fig. 10, without disturbing the gas or in any way interfering with the
operator. To connect with the cock _h_ in Fig. 9 it is only necessary to
disconnect one line of hose and connect the pump; then close the other
cock and work the pump until air bubbles up in the upper tank; then shut
the cock, remove the pump and connect the hose to the gasoline can, open
the cocks and the apparatus is ready for use.


                           Air Holder No. 2.

To make the air holder shown in Fig. 11, take a sheet of No. 26 gauge
galvanized iron 30 inches wide. Make it into a cylinder 26 inches in
diameter, double seam a flat bottom on it, and wire the top with ¼-inch
iron rod, which will make it stiff enough to withstand the pressure of
water. Close to the bottom and 3 inches apart punch two holes, _a_ and
_b_, large enough to receive ⅜-inch galvanized pipe couplings. Solder
these couplings in place.

On the inside of this tank and into these couplings screw two pieces of
⅜-inch pipe 4 inches long with elbows pointing straight up. Into these
elbows screw two pieces of ⅜-inch pipe long enough to come flush with
the top of the tank F. On the outside of the tank and into the ⅜-inch
couplings screw two ⅜-inch nipples 2 inches long, and on these nipples
screw two ⅜-inch hose end gas cocks.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 11.—Air Holder No. 2._
]

Now, with the same sized sheet iron, make another tank 2 inches smaller
in diameter than the first tank. This should have a flat bottom, and be
wired as previously described. Then take four strips of sheet iron 30
inches long and 2 inches wide, and form each into V shape lengthwise.
Lay off the circumference of this tank in four equal spaces. One side of
the V-shaped pieces should then be soldered on at each space. The other
side should be left loose to allow for adjustment. These pieces form the
guides to the upper tank and prevent it from tipping sideways and
binding. Two of the guides are shown in the illustration, Fig. 11.

The lower tank should now be filled about one-third full of water. The
upper tank should then be inverted and placed in it. The air pump must
then be connected to one of the ⅜-inch cocks with a short piece of hose,
and the air should be pumped into it until the upper tank rises to its
highest level.

The pressure in this form of air holder must be regulated by weights,
and to secure 1 pound of pressure it is necessary to place weights equal
to 1 pound for every inch in area contained in the opening in the upper
tank. Two drop handles, such as are used on heavy milk cans, should be
riveted and soldered on the sides of the tank to facilitate moving it
about.


                           Air Holder No. 3.

Fig. 12 is a cut of a bellows with a contained air holder. It is not
practical to try to make this article, as it can be purchased from any
plumbing supply house and is not expensive. It is used principally by
dentists, but it is also used in laboratories to supply air to the
compound blow pipe. It consists of a small bellows held from the floor
on iron legs, with a spring inside the bellows to hold them open, and
has a rubber bag fastened to the under side to hold a small supply of
air. The rubber bag is incased in a string net to prevent it from
becoming inflated too much and bursting. This bag serves to equalize the
pressure. The size known as No. 10 A will supply 75 cubic feet per hour
at a pressure of 1½ pounds to the square inch, which is sufficient for
lead as heavy as 24 pounds. For the light weight leads the pressure can
be reduced by pumping lightly and not filling the bag more than half
full.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 12.—Air Holder No. 3, Combined with Bellows._
]

Any of the three described air blast arrangements will answer the
purpose, so it is immaterial which is used, and it is left to the
discretion of the beginner to obtain whichever is the most convenient.


                             The Blow Pipe.

Next comes the blow pipe. The only practical compound blow pipe on the
market is shown in Fig. 13, and is known as Walmsley's. This is a
modification of the Bunsen burner, and consists of a bent blow pipe with
the air tube in the center, as shown in Fig. 14. It is a perfect working
blow pipe in every respect, and I should advise every one interested in
the work to purchase one. For while seams cannot be burned with it in
any other position than horizontal, it will be found useful in
lengthening traps or lead bends, for which purpose it is well adapted
and can be put into instant use, thereby saving its cost many times over
in wiping solders.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 13.—The Walmsley Compound Blow Pipe._
]


                     Burning with Illuminating Gas.

With illuminating gas it is only necessary to connect the gas jet to the
compound blow pipe with the hose and regulate the supply of gas with the
gas cock. The air inlet is then connected to the air holder, or air may
be supplied with the mouth, but good results are not obtained with the
mouth, as only a good blow pipe solderer can keep up the blast
necessary. To burn the seams use the same flux and follow directions
given for gasoline gas.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 14.—Sectional View of Walmsley's Blow Pipe._
]


           Making the Gasoline Gas for Burning the Generator.

With a piece of ¼-inch hose connect the top of the can C, Fig. 9, with
the air holder D, then connect the spout or gas outlet _e_ of the can to
the gas end _f_ of the compound blow pipe. The air outlet _g_ of the
compound blow pipe should then be connected to the remaining cock _h_,
in the air holder. If the bellows is used, it will be necessary to
connect the air with ¼-inch tee, _m_, in which three short nipples have
previously been screwed.

The apparatus is now ready for use. Gasoline being really a liquid gas,
it takes its first opportunity to assume its natural shape. The natural
way to convert gasoline into gas is by simple evaporation. So taking
advantage of this fact, the action will be thus: By forcing air into and
through a body of gasoline sufficient of the gasoline is taken up to
form a dense vapor, which will light and burn at the jet, similar to
illuminating gas. With the admixture of air in the compound blow pipe,
it gives a flame of very intense heat. But, in common with illuminating
gas, it is so rich in carbon that it gives an oxidizing flame, and makes
it necessary to use a flux, which should be Yager's soldering salts
mixed as per the directions on the bottle. If this is difficult to
procure, a good substitute can be made by mixing equal parts of powdered
borax and sal ammoniac in a little water.

To operate this device the air should be turned on the gasoline and
lighted at the jet. The air should then be admitted gradually until the
flame is brought to the proper size and condition, indicated by its
being blue and pointed. If too much gas is admitted the flame will be
yellow and will blacken the work by depositing a coat of soot on it. If
too much air is admitted the flame will be ragged and noisy, and the
temperature will be too low to heat the metal. The flame is at its best
heat when it burns with a pale blue color which does not show any yellow
streaks.

Before attempting to burn the generator the beginner should practice on
pieces of sheet lead. It is next to impossible to burn seams in any
other position than horizontal with this flame, as it rapidly oxidizes
the lead, and in spite of all precaution the lead will become
unmanageable in upright seams, so that the beginner would waste time in
practicing on seams in any other position than horizontal. If directions
have been followed in cutting the lead for the generator the seams will
occur only in that position.

To burn the generator the seams should be shaved clean, both on the
under and upper sides, for a distance of ⅛ inch, making a seam ¼ inch
wide, taking care to have the lead seams lie close to each other, for,
if they do not, this flame will cause the edges of the lead to spread
away from each other and leave a hole that is difficult to patch.

Now apply the flux with a small brush. When the flame is in working
order bring it quickly to bear on the end of the seam nearest you to be
burned. When it starts to fuse draw the flame as quickly away, always
drawing it to one side, and from the upper to the lower sheet. The
melted drop will follow the flame and unite with the melted drop on the
lower sheet.

It is necessary to have the shave hook near at hand, so that, in case of
oxidizing when fusing, the melted drop can be broken up and allowed to
flow in place.

With a little practice and patience the generator can be burned all
right in this manner. This gas is perfectly safe and can be handled with
impunity. This method would, of course, be impracticable to use on a job
of any size, but I have used it several times where nothing else could
be obtained, and have always had very good success with it.




                              CHAPTER VI.
                       CONNECTING THE APPARATUS.


We now assume that the generator is charged and the rest of the
apparatus is finished and ready for use, so we will proceed to connect
it up ready for a trial.

About 30 feet of ¼-inch heavy rubber tubing should be procured. This
hose should be heavy enough to allow of its being pulled around without
kinking and shutting off the supply of gas. A piece of this hose 5 feet
long should be slipped on the gas cock M on the generator, shown in Fig.
1, and then slipped over the gas inlet tube of the scrubbing cup _n_.
One must be sure that this is connected to the gas inlet tube, which is
the tube that dips under the water in the scrubbing cup.

With another 5-foot piece of hose connect the gas outlet of scrubbing
cup _o_ to the right hand cock on the mixing fork _f_. Always connect
the gas on the same side so as to avoid confusion of cocks. Then with a
10-foot piece of hose connect the air cock on the air holder _p_ or
bellows to the remaining cock on the mixing fork _g_. An 8-foot piece
should be connected from the gas outlet on mixing fork _e_ to the blow
pipe _i_.

These tubes must fit tight to prevent any possible leak of gas, and if
they do not they should be tightened on with pieces of wire. The
remaining piece of hose can be used to connect the air pump C to the air
inlet cock _s_ on the air holder, but if the bellows are used this will
not be needed.

Now place in the scrubbing cup a half dozen pieces of blue vitriol, or
copperas, as it is commonly called. Then pour in clear water until it
flows out of the trap screw _z_. This screw can be made tight by using
for packing a piece of wicking which has been saturated with tallow.
After preparing the apparatus as above, refer to the cut of the complete
apparatus and compare the connections on the cut with those made from
the above directions, to make positive that they are right. If they
agree, the apparatus is now ready for use.


                         Testing the Apparatus.

It is necessary to test the generator for leaks, as a small blow hole
may sometimes be left in some of the seams or the cocks or cleaning
screws become defective.

To do this, first close the gas cock on the top of the gas chamber and
make up the cleaning and charging screws, which must be set on a bed of
soft putty. Then fill the acid chamber full of hot water, first
measuring the water so as to ascertain just how much solution is
required in proportion to the amount of water, as it takes the same
quantity at all times. Allow it to stand for a few moments, then mark
the water line with a pencil or nail, when it should be left standing
for an hour. The water should stay at the mark indicated for an
indefinite time. If it sinks during this test it shows that there is a
leak in the generator and it must be located and repaired.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 15.—Mixing Fork._
]

To locate the leak the gas cock should be opened and the water allowed
to run into the gas chamber. If this does not show the leak, force the
water back into the acid chamber, which is done by attaching the air
pump to the gas cock. Then taking a piece of soap and making a stiff
lather, daub it over the cocks and cleaning and charging screw. When the
leak is found the escaping air will cause bubbles to be blown. If the
leak does not become apparent after the above process, the side boards
of the generator should be taken off and the operation repeated on the
seams.

Under no circumstances must the apparatus be left until there is
absolutely no doubt as to its being perfectly tight, as a slight leak
would be likely to cause a disastrous explosion and injure or probably
blind the operator. Flying vitriol is not a very pleasant thing to get
in one's eyes.

The apparatus should be frequently tested in this manner: Before drawing
off the water it is desirable to learn what amount of gas pressure there
will be when the generator is charged, so that the pressure of air and
gas can be equalized. The mathematical rule for this is to multiply the
head in feet by 0.434, and the result will be the pressure in pounds; or
an approximate way of determining the pressure is to allow ½ pound
pressure for every foot of head. For example: The hight of liquid in the
generator measured from the bottom of the acid supply pipe to the top of
the water or acid line, when at its highest level, would be 3 feet.
Allowing ½ pound for every foot in hight would give a pressure of 1½
pounds, which is slightly in excess of the mathematical rule, which is 3
× 0.434 = 1.302, or 1 pound 4 ounces, but to be accurate it is well to
attach a mercury gauge to the gas cock. Note the hight of the column of
mercury. Then attach the gauge to the blast apparatus, and if the
floating air holder is used, sufficient weight must be put on the top of
air holder to raise the column of mercury to a point not quite as high
as is indicated by the generator. These weights can then be weighed and
a similar weight made of lead to correspond, which can be kept for
permanent use. If the bellows are used, the size specified should be
obtained, and the pressure will be all right for this size generator
without further trouble. If the air holder indicated by Fig. 8 is used,
all that is necessary is to make the hights of the water line in both
generator and air holder equal, and the pressure must be the same.

[Illustration]

                       _Fig. 16._      _Fig. 17._

                            _Mixing Forks._

The reason that the air pressure should not be heavier than the gas
pressure is that if the air were the stronger there would be danger of
the air working back into the gas tube and causing an explosion in the
tubes; consequently it is well to note this point carefully. Many lead
burners will say that the pressure of air is of no consequence, and all
that is required is a sufficient supply; but my experience and
experiments have convinced me that when the pressures of air and gas are
nearly equal the best results are obtained.


                     The Mixing Fork and Blow Pipe.

The mixing fork and blow pipe can be made in any plumbing shop and
should be made of the smallest size pipe available.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 18.—Blow Pipe and Tip._
]

To make the mixing fork, purchase two ⅛-inch female hose end gas cocks
and 2 feet of ⅛-inch iron pipe size brass tubing. Take a piece of the
tubing 12 inches long, cut a regular iron pipe thread on each end, then
bend it over a mandrel stake or a piece of 4-inch soil pipe into a half
circle, as shown in Fig. 15, so that the ends will come about 4 inches
apart. In the center of this piece drill a ⅛-inch hole, _a_. Then cut
from the remaining piece of tubing a piece 3 inches long. Solder, or,
better yet, have this piece brazed on to the bent piece at _a_, taking
care that no solder can run in and partially stop the hole _a_. Then
screw the two ⅛-inch gas cocks on the ends _b_ and _c_. This will
complete the mixing fork; or this fork can be made by bending a piece of
pipe at an angle, as shown in Fig. 16; then cut another piece equal in
length to the bent piece from the angle _e_ to the end. One end of this
piece must be filed to fit the piece _d_. A hole can then be drilled at
_e_. Threads must be cut on these ends, after which they can be brazed
together. Or a good fork can be had by using a special casting. This
casting is used for and is known as a beer switch, and can be purchased
of any dealer in bar supplies, Fig. 17. The same pattern and size of
cocks can be used for this fork as previously described. Neither of
these mixing forks has any advantage over the other, but three styles
are given, as possibly one may be easier to make than the other. Iron
pipe may be used instead of brass if desired.

To make the blow pipe, take the remaining piece of tubing and cut a
thread on one end. As the other end slips into the hose, it does not
need a thread. The thread end must then be bent at right angles to the
tubing, as _c_, Fig. 16. This can be done by boring a hole in a block of
hard wood just large enough for the tubing to enter, and 1½ inches deep.
Trim off the sharp edge of this hole so as not to kink the pipe in
bending. The end of the tube can then be inserted in this hole and bent
to the desired shape, as shown. This completes the blow pipes with the
exception of the tips, of which you should have three sizes, drilled as
follows: One for heavy lead, 3-32; one for medium weight, 2-32, and one
for very light sheets, 1-32. These tips are made of small pieces of cast
or turned brass, preferably with a milled shoulder, so as to facilitate
removing with the fingers. Probably the easiest way to get these tips is
to make a pattern out of wood and have several of them cast. They can
then be drilled and tapped to any desired size, or they can be cut from
a round bar of brass or copper, filed or turned to a point, then drilled
and tapped. The dimensions and particulars can be had from B in Fig. 18
without further description being necessary. A common blow pipe, such as
is used with the alcohol torch, can be used for practicing on light
sheets. But the beginner is advised to procure the blow pipe and a set
of tips described in Fig. 18 before attempting to burn any heavy lead.




                              CHAPTER VII.
                        CHARGING THE GENERATOR.


After making sure that the generator is perfectly tight we will proceed
to charge it. After removing the 4-inch charging screw take 15 pounds of
commercial spelter, which has been broken up with a hammer into pieces
about 2 inches square, and place this in the gas chamber, distributing
it as evenly as possible over the perforated bottom. This is done so
that the zinc will expose all the surface possible to the action of the
acid, and must be observed in order to obtain the best results. Do not
put any pieces of spelter into the generator that are small enough to
drop through the perforated bottom, for if they do they will be likely
to generate gas, which will give overpressure and blow gas out through
the acid chamber. This can do no harm unless close to a light, but it is
very annoying to have acid blown all over the generator. The charging
and cleaning screws must be screwed up tight. After closing the gas cock
on the generator take the quantity of water (less one-seventh) that was
found to be necessary when testing the apparatus, and pour this into the
acid chamber.

Mark the water line and watch it for a few moments to make sure that
everything is tight. Then take of sulphuric acid a quantity equal to
one-seventh of the water used, and pour that into the water in the acid
chamber. It will diffuse itself through the water and thoroughly mix.
Experience has taught me that acid mixed in any proportion stronger than
seven parts of water to one part of acid does not act as quickly as when
mixed in the proportion mentioned. The reason for this is that the
strong acid simply coats the zinc with a deposit or scum of sulphate of
zinc, which is soluble in water, but is not soluble in acid. Therefore,
if the acid is diluted with water to the above mentioned proportion the
water readily dissolves the sulphate and allows the acid to act freely
on the zinc.

This sulphate falls to the bottom of the gas chamber and if allowed to
accumulate causes the clogging mentioned later. The beginner will
observe from the explanation that the generator cannot be crowded by
making the solution strong. It sometimes occurs that the vitriol seems
to be stronger than usual, and then again the reverse is also true. Good
vitriol should be almost as thick as cutting oil, and will work very
quickly. Care must be taken in pouring it into the generator to prevent
spattering. This is best avoided by having a quart measure made of lead
for this purpose. It should also be borne in mind that the _acid should
always be added to the water_, never the water to the acid, as this
mixture always generates heat, and the result would be similar to adding
water to hot lead.


                   Automatic Action of the Generator.

The generator works best while hot. The gas cock on the generator should
now be opened and the mixture allowed to flow into the gas chamber until
it spurts out of the gas cock, which must then be closed. By this action
all the air in the gas chamber is expelled, leaving it free to generate
pure gas at once. This is a sure method of exhausting the air in the gas
chamber. The acid then attacks the zinc, causing it to decompose the
water and free the hydrogen contained in the acid.

This gas, by reason of its lightness, will rise to the surface of the
acid, and as pressure increases it will force the acid back up through
the acid supply pipe into the acid chamber, until the acid falls below
the perforated bottom. When the acid and zinc cease to come in contact
with each other the generation of gas stops until gas is used, which
relieves the pressure; then more acid descends, and as it comes in
contact with the zinc more gas is generated, replacing that which has
been used. This action makes the generator automatic, unless clogging
with sulphate of zinc takes place. This may happen at any time if the
apparatus is not cleaned after each day's use.


                        Cleaning the Generator.

To clean the generator in this case attach the air pump to the gas cock
on the generator and force the acid up into the acid chamber by pumping
air slowly into the gas chamber until the acid rises to the proper hight
in the acid chamber, where it can be held by forcing a long wooden plug
into the acid supply pipe. The pumping must cease when the acid rises to
the proper level, or the excess pressure of air will work up through the
supply pipe and cause a blow of acid.

The charging screw can then be removed and the zinc taken out and washed
in hot water. Remove the clean out screw and run one or two pails of hot
water through the gas chamber. This will remove the deposits of sulphate
paste. The zinc can then be replaced, the screws tightened and the acid
released again. Be sure and exhaust the air in the gas chamber, as
previously described, by letting the air spurt out of the gas cock
before connecting it to the scrubbing cup. Care must be taken not to
have any lights near the generator when blowing out this mixture of gas
and air, as it is very explosive.

The apparatus will never clog if cleaned after each day's work, which
should always be done. The tubes should be removed and hung up over
night to dry. The acid, if not spent, can be dipped out of the acid
chamber and placed in jugs. The generator can then be carried to a drain
and filled with hot water, which should be allowed to flow out through
the cleaning screw. This will clean the zinc and wash out all the
sulphate deposit. The screws may then be tightened and the apparatus
left ready for the next day's use.


                      Fire Trap and Scrubbing Cup.

One of the most essential parts of a lead burning apparatus is a
reliable fire trap and scrubbing cup. This trap reduces to a minimum the
danger from explosion caused by neglecting to free the gas from air. Its
use as a scrubbing cup is also of infinite value.

The action of the vitriol on the zinc produces a violent ebullition, and
a small quantity of the acid is carried in the form of spray from the
generator to the tubes, and, unless caught and removed, will frequently
get into the blow pipe tip and extinguish the flame, making it necessary
to remove the hose and hang it up to drain and dry, which oftentimes
causes waste of time and annoyance.

Almost all spelter or zinc contains more or less arsenic in a metallic
state. It is also found in sulphuric acid. This arsenic is released from
the acid or zinc as they decompose and is carried by the force of the
volume of gas to the blow pipe tip, where, owing to it being necessary
for the operator to get his eyes close to the flames in order to see the
reducing flame, this poisonous gas will be breathed into the lungs and
oftentimes cause a fatal illness. This fact has been disputed by many,
who say that it is impossible for the unit of lightness—_i. e._,
hydrogen gas—to pick up and carry a heavy metal such as arsenic. Arsenic
does not form a chemical combination with hydrogen, having a very slight
affinity for it, but is carried to the blow pipe solely by the force of
the volume of gas.

To prove the above assertion we will refer to Professor Marsh, who
demonstrated the ability of hydrogen to carry arsenic in the following
manner: If a solution containing arsenic be added to a solution of
sulphuric acid and zinc, the resulting hydrogen will, upon ignition,
deposit a ring of metallic arsenic upon any cold surface that the flame
be directed upon. (Professor Marsh's experiment.)

It will be seen from the above that it is imperative that the operator
use a scrubbing cup and see that it is properly filled with a solution
of blue vitriol. The ordinary impurities of hydrogen generated in this
manner are sulphur and carbon, which should be removed if possible.

The actual use of the scrubbing cup is to catch the above mentioned
spray and precipitate to some extent all other impurities contained in
the gas, and produce gas sufficiently pure for lead burning.


                     Directions for Making the Cup.

To make this cup take a piece of 4-inch lead pipe 7 inches long (an
ordinary piece of 4-inch lead soil pipe will do); flange out one end and
burn in a flat bottom. Three inches from the bottom, and in the side of
this 4-inch pipe, burn in a trap screw, _a_, Fig. 19, a screw taken from
an old lead trap being just the thing. This is to regulate the hight of
the solution in the cup. Now make a top by taking a piece of lead and
raising it about ¾ inch; punch two holes in this top, _b_ and _c_, large
enough to let a ⅜-inch lead pipe pass through; flange out the top of the
cup and fit and burn this top in place. Take two pieces of ⅜-inch lead
pipe, one to be 3 inches long and the other to be 10 inches long, and
with the dresser draw one end of each to nearly a point, so that the
hose can be slipped on tight. The long piece _c_ should now be slipped
through one of the holes in the top of the cup, holding it ½ inch from
the bottom _d_ and burning it in. This is the gas inlet and should be
marked as such. The short piece is then placed in the remaining hole and
burnt in place. The action will be thus: The gas entering the gas inlet
pipe is caused to pass through a solution of blue vitriol 2½ inches
deep, when the acid is caught and the gas is scrubbed and rendered as
nearly pure as possible. It then enters the outlet pipe and is ready for
use. If the directions have been followed the cup will resemble the
illustration Fig. 17. No trouble will be experienced with this cup.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 19.—Fire Trap and Scrubbing Cup._
]




                             CHAPTER VIII.
                     THE FLAME AND ITS MANAGEMENT.


Before attempting to light the gas the operator must be sure that all
the air is exhausted from the tubes. Otherwise the flame will go back
and explode in the tubes or fire trap. To be sure of this the beginner
must test the gas. A handy test tube can be made by capping one end of a
piece of ½-inch pipe, which should be about 6 inches long. To test the
gas, first open wide the gas cock M on the generator, Fig. 1. Then open
the gas cock _f_ on the mixing fork and let the gas displace the air in
the tubes, which it will do in about one minute. Then invert the test
tube, Fig. 20, and hold it over the blow pipe tip for a moment until the
gas has displaced the air in the tube. Then quickly place your thumb
over the opening of the test tube, which will keep the gas from
escaping. Close the gas cock _f_ on the mixing fork, then take the test
tube to one side away from the generator, still keeping it inverted, and
bring it close to a lighted match or candle. It will light with a pop,
and if it is free from air it will burn quietly down in the tube until
the gas is exhausted. Continue to test the gas in this manner until it
burns as described, when it may be safely lit at the jet without fear of
its burning back. This precaution is necessary only after opening the
generator for some purpose.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 20.—Method of Testing Gas._
]


                    Regulating Volume and Pressure.

This generator evolves gas under a greater pressure than can be used on
most work, and for this reason the flame will at first be long, noisy
and unsteady, as shown in A, Fig. 21, but, as there are two cocks, the
volume and pressure can be regulated to the requirements of the work at
hand. Now, to note the peculiarities of this flame, we will close the
gas cock _f_ on the mixing fork until the flame is about 3 inches long.
It will be of a pale reddish color and will burn steadily. The inner
flame is not as yet very well defined. Then open the air cock _g_
slowly, and when sufficient air has been admitted the flame will be seen
to shoot out suddenly and then shorten to about 1¾ or 2 inches in
length. It will be smooth, compact, and will have the appearance of
darting rapidly. If the correct quantity of air has been admitted the
inner flame, as shown in B, Fig. 21, will then be plainly seen, and its
apex, which is the point of greatest heat, will be blue. This inner
flame is known as the nonoxidizing flame, and is the flame with which
the fusing is done.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 21.—Flames Under Different Pressures._
]

The outer flame will change to a bluish color. Its temperature is low,
and its effect on the lead is to coat the metal with a heavy blue oxide,
under which the lead runs but does not unite. To demonstrate this, bring
the point of the inner or nonoxidizing flame to bear on a piece of sheet
lead. It will fuse bright and clean and will have a circle of gray oxide
around it. Then quickly remove the flame and the spot will remain
bright. Now, again bring the flame to bear on the same piece of lead,
keeping the point of the inner flame at least ¾ inch away from the lead.
It will melt and flow together, but will be covered with a coat of gray
oxide and the union will not be perfect. Slowly withdraw the flame, and
before the flame is entirely removed the spot will be heavily coated
with a thick blue oxide, under which the lead will not unite. C, in Fig.
21, shows the appearance of the flame when too much air has been
admitted and it is on the point of going out from lack of gas.

The proper way to use the gas is to open wide the gas cock M on the
generator, and do any regulating of the flame with the gas cock _f_ on
the mixing fork. These cocks should have pieces of heavy wire brazed or
soldered lengthwise of the handles, Fig. 16, _h_ and _i_, so as to form
lever handles. This will allow the gas and air cocks to be closed or
opened by gently tapping the levers _h_ and _i_, which is the only way
that a slight variation can be had, for if you try to regulate them with
the finger you will constantly open or close them too much, and the
result is that in adding air too much is always admitted, which will
blow out the flame, making it necessary to turn off the air and light
the jet again, and many times this operation will have to be repeated
before the flame is correctly adjusted.

It must be remembered to always turn on and light the gas before
admitting any air, and when through with the flame the air must be
turned off first, then the gas. If this operation is reversed an
explosive mixture of gas and air would form in the tube and would spoil
the tube, if nothing worse.


                         Study the Flame Well.

The beginner should study the flame until perfectly familiar with the
color and form of the proper flame. One of the greatest troubles that
the beginner will have with the blow pipe is the inability to regulate
the flame to the requirements of the work. For instance: A flame that
would work nicely on 12-pound sheets would burn holes in 4-pound sheets
before you had time to touch the lead with the inner flame. For that
reason three different sizes of tips should be used. On a 2-pound sheet
the smallest, or 1-32, tip should be used, and the flame before reducing
should not be longer than ¾ inch, and when reduced the inner flame can
hardly be distinguished, but you can easily tell when it touches the
lead by the metal fusing bright. If it is desired to fuse 12-pound
sheets the 2-32-inch tip should be substituted, and it would be found
necessary to have the jet of gas about 3 inches long, which, when
reduced, would be about 2 inches long and would show the inner flame
very distinctly.

The only way to determine the size of the flame necessary is by
experimenting with it. It will also come with experience. The flame
should be reduced to a size that will not melt the lead as soon as it
touches it. Rather, it should be in such condition that the lead would
have to be heated first and let the fusing come gradually. In that way
it can be determined just what sized drop is required, and also plenty
of time is allowed to place it just where it is wanted—particularly on
upright seams and _imperatively_ on inverted seams.

It is not necessary to be so particular on horizontal seams, as on seams
in that position you are assisted by gravity. The lead drop that is
melted from the upper lap cannot do otherwise than unite with the under
lap. It must be remembered that in starting a seam you have cold lead to
fuse, and after the first drop is started the lead in its vicinity will
be heated almost to the melting point, and you will probably be
surprised to see the lead run at the approach of the flame for the next
application.


                             Do Not Hurry.

The point to be taught here is that you must not attempt to hurry this
work or holes will surely be burned in the sheets, which oftentimes
makes difficult work to patch. The old adage, “haste makes waste,” can
well be applied to lead burning. Sufficient time must be allowed for one
drop to set before attempting to place the next drop. Time spent on
practicing at the bench is time well spent, as many little details that
cannot be brought to the beginner's attention here will be learned in
that way and stored in his mind for future application.




                              CHAPTER IX.
                     THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF SEAMS.


There are two kinds of seams proper, viz.: The butt seam and the lap
seam. The butt seam is used principally for joining horizontal waste
pipes and in lengthening traps, or for any purpose where it is desired
not to have the point of junction show. This form of seam can be burned
clear through—that is, the lead can be heated until fusion takes place
nearly through the entire sheet. It is generally necessary to add lead
to the seam if it is desired to make the seam as strong as the sheet it
joins, unless the article to be burned is of such a size as to be
possible to allow of its being burned on both sides, which makes the
strongest of seams. The lead for the butt seams is prepared by rasping
the edges of the lead sheet to be joined straight and true, Fig. 22, so
that when the edges of the lead are brought together they will fit close
its entire length. The edges are then shaved for a distance of ⅛ inch
each side of the edge, making a seam ¼ inch wide. On stock heavier than
12-pound sheets the edge should be shaved off, making a deep V-shaped
groove, and the seams must be made by adding lead. This allows the
fusion to take place nearly through the sheet. The butt seam is the
simplest form to burn, no matter in what position it is placed.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 22.—Rasping the Edges of the Lead Sheet Straight and True._
]

The lap seam is the seam commonly used, and as between the butt seam and
the lap seam the latter is generally to be preferred. As it is not
necessary to cut and trim the edges true, it dispenses with any
additions of lead, except at rare intervals; it leaves the left hand
free to handle the shave hook, and the lap can be dressed to fit any
uneven spots. It also makes the next best seam to through fusing. By lap
seaming a tank can be lined in about half the time required to butt seam
the same article, which is an important item to the customer.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 23.—Burning a Lap Seam._
]

The lead for this form of seam is prepared, as its name indicates, by
lapping one sheet ½ to ¾ inch over the other sheet. The under edges are
to be shaved clean, as also the upper edge. The lead required to make
the seam is melted from the upper lap and is fused on the lower sheet.
There is no reason why the lead at the point of juncture cannot be made
as thick as the original lead. This is the point aimed at in practicing,
and the only accurate way to determine the relative strength of the
seams is to cut squarely across a finished seam, then bend the beam
slightly. The thickness can then be noted. A cross section of a perfect
lap seam is shown at _a_ in Fig. 23. The beginner should practice the
different seams until the thickness of the joint can be told by the
looks of the lead. A few days' diligent practice at the bench will soon
train the eye to note any imperfection that may arise.

The different seams will be taken up serially. A description of how the
seams are prepared and the several positions of the blow pipe, as well
as the little difficulties that may arise, is the extent of the
instruction that can be given. The rest must come with practice and the
application of a little common sense. There is no royal road to this
business; but practice, and practice hard, is the only way to
satisfactorily master the blow pipe and flame, and in practicing
remember that all this work has been done before, and can be easily done
again, _and by you_. Do not get discouraged by failure to make a perfect
seam at the first application, but stick to it for a short time and it
will be found to be a most fascinating pastime, for which the persistent
student will eventually be well repaid.


                            Flat Butt Seam.

For practicing I would recommend the beginner to use pieces of sheet
lead about 12 inches long, as strips of that length are much easier to
prepare. The edges are straightened with a fine rasp which is held
lengthwise of and parallel to the edge to be trued, in the manner shown
in Fig. 22. The rasp must be used lightly, or it will be apt to tear the
lead and so leave it in worse condition than before using it. The edge
should then be gone over with the shave hook and cleaned. Then shave the
top surface a distance of ⅛ inch each way from the edge, which will make
a seam ¼ inch wide when finished. Then butt the edges together and
secure the sheets firmly to a board with a few tacks. The extra lead
that is necessary to add to make a butt joint full must be obtained from
a strip of lead, which should be about ⅛ inch square and _shaved clean_.

After regulating the flame to the proper size and shape the burning
should be begun at the end of the seam nearest the operator. With the
point of the inner flame melt off a drop from the lead strip and have it
fall squarely on the seam just slightly in advance of the point of
fusion. Follow it up with the flame, placing the point of the inner
flame directly over the edges of the seam, which is almost under the
lead drop. As soon as fusion commences on the lead seam the melted drop
will flow to the bright spot and immediately unite with it. The flame
must then be quickly removed and the drop be allowed to set.

In order to avoid any misunderstanding regarding the time required for
the lead drop to set I would say that the drop will cool immediately
upon the flame being removed from contact with it. It is not necessary
to wait for any specified time, but if the flame is allowed to play
constantly on the sheet it is apt to get overheated, and when in that
condition it takes very little heat to set the lead running like water.
To avoid this the flame should be lifted clear of the seam for an
instant after each drop has been fused into place.

[Illustration:

  _Fig. 24.—Burning a Flat Butt Seam._
]

These remarks apply to all seams that are made by the blow pipe process
and should be noted, as this particular point will not be referred to
again. Now melt off another drop and let it fall as before, only it
should lap on the previous drop about one-half its diameter. Secure it
to the seam as before. This operation should be repeated until the seam
is completed, and if the seam is correctly done a section will appear as
_a_ in Fig. 24. This form of flat seam should be practiced until
perfectly familiar with the blow pipe flame and until the beginner can
approach the lead with the flame without burning holes through it, which
will probably be the first thing to happen.


                           Upright Butt Seam.

The upright butt seam is seldom used on large work, as it is a difficult
matter to make an upright butt seam that will stand the test, as, if a
finished seam is cut into short pieces, an examination of the severed
ends will show many weak places that were previously thought to be very
strong. The reason of this is that the heat necessary to fuse through
the lead will cause the lead to run from the seam and leave a hole.

The sheets for practice are prepared as described for flat butt seams,
and must be securely tacked to a board which can be supported in an
upright position. The burning is begun at the bottom of the seam. The
flame must be shortened considerably, as the fusing must take place
somewhat slower than in flat seams, as in upright or inverted seams the
attraction of gravity remains to be overcome, and the operator must have
plenty of time between the commencement of brightening and the actual
fusing to drive the melting drop to the exact position desired.